---
layout: page
title: Reproducibility vs Ethics
---

**This is a reflection on [Dr. Mei-Po Kwan's webinar](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hDpa3c5ljsA&ab_channel=AmericanGeographicalSociety) for the American Geographical Society for Friday, May 14th.**


This reflection was done in preparation for a debate on Reproducibility vs Ethics in the context of big data, data privacy, and COVID-19 spatial analysis where my assigned stance on this issue was to argue for curtailing or limiting spatial big data research.

The use of data during an event as large as the COVID-19 pandemic has great potential for understanding health risks and risk prevention. However, much of this data involves privacy concerns regarding the movement and tracking of people through different environments and spaces in order to understand who or what poses as a risk. Technology has evolved to provide us with several different methods for the collection of big data ranging from people's mobile location to credit card usage to CCTV facial and voice recognition. These technologies also range in their capacity for users themselves to control and have some degree of agency over their privacy and its collection by either the government or companies. Phone tracking and location services can be adjusted by the user whereas CCTV footage is data that has not been collected with anyone's consent. Even with agency, most people are unaware of how using technology leads to their personal data collection. With regards to technology as widespread as CCTVs, consent cannot often be collected at such a large scale. A lot of this data is collected by private companies that are not subject to regulation surrounding ethical data usage. Furthermore, access to sensitive health and mobility data can have large implications for vulnerable communities, further increasing their vulnerability. Data in the wrong hands can be extremely dangerous and research that does not consider the implications of this can become a source of harm for many people.  

Discussions on data rights have largely come to the fore in recent years. Governments have attempted to pose restrictions and form regulation around these rights, however, the fast pace of technology makes it difficult to form policy and enforce it. Academia is in a unique position where they have the capacity, resources, know-how, and influence to consider the ethical implications behind data that is collected and in use in research. From the real world collection of data to analysis, it is easy to lose the thread of information as the initial data becomes more and more abstracted. However, it is important to not underestimate the capacity for analysed data to be reverse-geocoded to unearth personal information and identities. Academia has a large responsibility to be aware of the kinds of data they use in their research and more so, how they use this data and with what intents. It is not often that we can rely on governing authorities to regulate data collection and so the responsibility of using data largely falls on the shoulders of academic integrity. Considerations, such as geo-masking sensitive elements of location data, can be used to safeguard information in research, but the very use of certain kinds of data that is being collected without people's consent should also be considered in academia. Kwan stresses the "need to develop risk assessment methods and confidential data sharing infrastructure to address privacy issues."

In the AAG webinar, Kwan mentions Hong Kong's public COVID-19 dashboard, which tracks COVID cases at the building scale. This method for distributing information on peoples' and their neighbours' health status has huge implications for privacy, where people may easily interpret who poses as a risk, resulting in the potential stigmatisation and alienation of individuals. In the US, COVID-19 cases are collected at the county scale, which may be too large a scale for smaller communities to understand the risk that is present in their area. In terms of curtailing the use of case data that will be publicized to inform people on their community's COVID status, how much and at what scale do people need to understand the status of health risk surrounding them? How do we find a balance between providing this information to people and protecting peoples' privacy? Kwan also brings up the fact that issue of privacy varies across cultures, stating that people in Hong Kong and South Korea are not as concerned with providing their contact tracing details to the government than people in the EU or US. This brings up another question regarding curtailing spatial big data research: To what extent do these ethical implications apply when the data is willingly given? How do we consider consent from such large populations, where there are always going to be people who are vulnerable to providing their information for research?

Curtailment does not necessarily mean limiting research. As Zook et al. (2017) puts it, "responsible big data research is not about preventing research but making sure that the work is sound, accurate, and maximizes the good while minimizing harm."


*American Geographical Society. Location Tech Task Force, Leadership Spotlight, Tracking Movement through Space during COVID-19. September 8th, 2020 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hDpa3c5ljsA&ab_channel=AmericanGeographicalSociety*

*Zook M, Barocas S, boyd d, Crawford K, Keller E, Gangadharan SP, et al. (2017) Ten simple rules for responsible big data research. PLoS Comput Biol 13(3): e1005399. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005399*
