---
layout: page
title: Spatial Twitter Analysis
---

**This is a reflection on the reading of Wang et al. (2016) for Wednesday, April 28th.**

* Summarize the analytical techniques applied and how the results of those techniques were communicated in text, numbers, tables, or data visualizations
* Consder whether you consider this research paper to be reproducibile and whether you consider this paper to be replicable. Refer to the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine definitions of reproducibility and replicability and our prior discussions about GIS as a Science.

In order to analyse the spatial and temporal variations of wildfire-related tweets as well as to characterize wildfires in San Diego County, Wang et al. (2016) used three methods of analyses. Following the use of the Twitter search API to collect twitter data based on the keywords “fire” and “wildfire” and further filtering these searches both spatially and temporally, the authors utilized dual kernel density estimation (KDE) to analyse spatial patterns of two specific wildfires (Bernado and San Marcos) along with population data by census block. This method was used to detect hotspots of spatial point data based on the geographic coordinates that the filtered tweets provided. This analysis generated a rasterized map of cells indicating the intensity levels of the wildfire-related tweets over the population. The second analyses used was text mining in order to search for important terms and clusters in the wildfire-related tweets. This was conducted using the ‘tm’ package in R after the raw tweets data was cleaned of stop words and URLs and a term-document matrix was obtained. Frequencies of words and clusters were calculated and either graphed into plots or collected in tables. Lastly, the authors conducted a social network analysis whereby retweet data was fed into the R package “igraph” to understand the connections within the network of people retweeting wildfire-related tweets. The “indegree” and “outdegree” cumulative distributions of the retweet network were graphed as well as a map of connections among different twitter handles.

I found that this paper went into a significant amount of detail in terms of the initial collection of data and the pre-processing and cleaning required for the analysis. However, as we had seen with the reproduction of the Malcomb et al. (2014) paper, it is difficult to say for certain whether any given research is reproducible based on a reading of the paper without trying to go through the process of obtaining the findings, as uncertainties in the methodology may be more apparent then. Besides this, I do see this research being reproducible (obtaining consistent results with the same data and methodology), but it is possible that twitter data may change given that tweets are deleted with the deletion of Twitter accounts, for example. It may be difficult to obtain consistent data each time, however, the methodology appears to be sound.

In terms of replicability, where the same question is being answered with different sources of data, I think the use of this methodology may depend on the context of the area where wildfires are occurring. Infrastructure in different areas may differ with power outages or failure in technology occurring more frequently with the onset of a disaster. For different reasons, Twitter, or other social media networks, may not be the most appropriate data from which to glean information on the spatial and temporal distribution of wildfires. Perhaps certain areas use different platforms for different purposes. In India, WhatsApp is the larger platform used for communication instead of Twitter. I’ve also been thinking about language a lot when searching for and cleaning through data. Words have different contextual meanings and how is this accounted for through the methodology? This issue may occur more frequently in other languages and therefore, the methodology would need to be adjusted to account for the respective language structure, function, and meaning. Although I think this research can be generally replicable with changes to the methodology depending on the context, the use of this study would need to be considered more thoroughly depending on the area.

*Malcomb, D. W., E. A. Weaver, and A. R. Krakowka. 2014. Vulnerability modeling for sub-Saharan Africa: An operationalized approach in Malawi. Applied Geography 48:17–30. DOI:10.1016/j.apgeog.2014.01.004*

*Wang, Z., X. Ye, and M. H. Tsou. 2016. Spatial, temporal, and content analysis of Twitter for wildfire hazards. Natural Hazards 83 (1):523–540.*
